DOCS-389 Create doc about remotes (#798)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/manage/remotes.md

---

> title: "Parts, Sub-Parts and Remotes"

Author: What do you want it to be renamed to? `parts-remotes.md` or something?

> title: "Parts, Sub-Parts and Remotes"

Reviewer: maybe parts-and-remotes!

linkTitle: "Remotes and Sub-Parts"
weight: 40
type: "docs"
description: "Connect robots to each other."
tags: ["server", "components", "services"]
---

When robots can communicate with each other, they can share resources and operate collaboratively.
This document explains how to establish secure connections between robots.

### Robot parts

> Robots are organized into *parts*, where each part represents a computer (a single-board computer like a Raspberry Pi or a desktop, laptop, or other computer) running `viam-server`, the hardware [components](/components/) attached to it, and any [services](/services/) or other resources running on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Robots are organized into *parts*, where each part represents a computer (a [single-board computer](/installation/prepare) or a desktop, laptop, or other computer) running `viam-server`, the hardware [components](/components/) attached to it, and any [services](/services/) or other resources running on it.

```
We want to stop calling out Raspberry Pi specifically as our aim is to support many SBCs

Author: Done on the other PR

Every robot has a main part.
Multi-part robots also have one or more *sub-parts* representing additional computers running `viam-server`.

There are two ways to link robot parts:

- **Sub-part**: If you have two computers within the *same robot*, use one as the main part and [connect the other to it as a sub-part](#configure-a-sub-part).

> - **Remote**: To connect two computers that are parts of *different robots*, [add one robot part as a remote part of the other robot](#configure-a-remote).

Reviewer: Within robot parts, this makes sense calling it remotes. We are still missing one slight thing which is to just talk about a remote that is either running on some non viam-server SDK or a viam-server running outside of App. We don't have to make large mention of them, but it is important to spell it out in one of our `###`s.

Author: I've gotten mixed messages about whether we are supposed to talk about running viam-server without connecting to the app.

Sorry what does ### mean? Does it mean in some doc somewhere or in a section here?

I'm not super confident in my understanding of how else you would use it or how much of an edge case that is. Should I include a note box at the bottom of "Configure a Remote" that says
"You can also configure a remote to:
 - An instance of `viam-server` that is not connected to the Viam app
 - A server other than `viam-server`"
 but then would we need to include instructions for how? How do they find the address and secret?

Reviewer: hmm. maybe let's just keep it as is for now and get feedback instead. I don't have any great ideas for how to section it up better right now

> - **Remote**: To connect two computers that are parts of *different robots*, [add one robot part as a remote part of the other robot](#configure-a-remote).

Author: I don't want to confuse people into thinking that by establishing a connection, they make two sub-parts of each other or two remotes of each other or something

Connections between robots are established using the best network path available.

When you configure a remote or a sub-part, the main robot part can access all the components and services configured on the remote robot part as though they were entities of the main robot part.
This is a one-way connection: The main robot part can access the resources of the remote robot part, but the remote robot cannot access the resources of the robot part remoting into it.

> <img src="../img/remotes/remotes-diagram.png" alt="Example of a remote and a two part robot where the main (and only) part of robot 1 remotes into the main part of robot 2, and thus has access to all resources of robot 2." >

Reviewer 2: The arrows being two way arrows do not clearly indicate that these are one-way connections.

Author: Yeah, I thought about that, but which way should the arrows go? The remote gets requests and sends data right?

> <img src="../img/remotes/remotes-diagram.png" alt="Example of a remote and a two part robot where the main (and only) part of robot 1 remotes into the main part of robot 2, and thus has access to all resources of robot 2." >

Author: Okay I don't like saying that a part configures something since I think of the human as doing the configuring. I will change it to "Part A of Robot 1 has Part A of Robot 2 as a remote part." 

I don't understand what X would be. Resource?

## Configuration

### Configure a sub-part

You can make a multi-part robot by first configuring one part which is the "main" part, and then configuring one or more sub-parts.
The main part will be able to access the resources of its sub-parts.
Sub-parts will *not* have access to the resources of the main part.

Use the parts drop-down menu in the top banner of your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) to add a new sub-part:

![The Viam app interface with the part drop-down open. A new part called "my-sub-part" is being created.](../img/remotes/sub-part-config.png)

<br>

{{% alert title="Note" color="note" %}}

> When you create a sub-part, a connection is established between the main part and the sub-part without you needing to explicitly configure a remote.

Reviewer 2: TBH I am not sure if this is still needed.  It feels already clear-cut to me.

Author: Yeah fair enough but idk whether to remove it. Do you think it hurts anything?

Reviewer 3: yeah I think we can remove it - will add the suggestion on the other PR

Author: Removed on the other PR

{{% /alert %}}

### Configure a remote

To establish a connection between a part of one robot and a part of a second robot, configure a `remote` on the first robot's part.

1. Go to the Viam app robot page of the robot part to which you wish to establish the remote connection.
   This is the robot part whose resources will be accessible to the other robot part.
2. Click the **CODE SAMPLE** tab.
3. On the **Language** toggle, select **Remotes**.
4. Copy the `address` of the robot to your clipboard.

![The Viam app CODE SAMPLE tab with Remotes selected and a copyable JSON snippet with the name, address and secret of the robot part.](../img/remotes/remote-address.png)

5. Go to the Viam app robot page of the robot part from which you want to establish a remote connection.
   This is the robot part that will be able to access the resources of the other robot part.
6. Click the **CONFIG** tab, and then click the **REMOTES** sub-tab.

![The Viam app CONFIG tab with the REMOTES sub-tab open.](../img/remotes/remote-create.png)

> 1. Give the remote a name (you can just use the name of the other robot part, for example, "my-other-robot-main") and click **Create Remote**.

Author: Because the linter was sneaky :p I will fix it :)

2. Paste the `address` (for example, `my-other-robot-main.abc1de23f4.viam.cloud`) into the **Address** field.
3. Click **Add Auth** and paste the `secret` from the other robot's **CODE SAMPLE** tab into the **Auth Key** field.

![The Viam app CONFIG tab with a remote configured.](../img/remotes/remote-config.png)

> ## Usage

Reviewer 2: OK the heading level here is confusing to me.  Is this relevant to sub-parts and remote connected parts?  If so, what do we say "remote part" - can we call them that only when they are connected explicitly with a remote?  If this is supposed to be only for remotes, we need to make it more clear - "Usage" sounds generic to both.

Author: You're right. How about:
```suggestion
## Use a remote resource with the SDKs
```

But actually I'm not clear: for sub-parts, is there a prepending of the part name? If so, I'll need to genericize this section. @edaniels ?

Reviewer: for sub parts, yes when talking to the main part

Author: Updated on the other PR
